JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: We sit down with
the U.K. defense secretary to discuss how
a growing coalition could change the fight
against ISIS.
MICHAEL FALLON, U.K. Defense Secretary: This
was never going to be a quick campaign. It
was your own Secretary Kerry who said he thought
the campaign in Iraq might last at least three
years, and we're not halfway through that
yet. But progress is being made.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then: how Muslims in America
are faring against a climate of fear.
AYA LAOFIR, High School Student: As I'm walking,
and I see people, they duck their heads, or
when I smile at them, they don't smile back,
I'm just like, oh, is it because I'm wearing
my scarf? Is it because of what's on the news?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks join us to analyze the week's
news.
All that and more on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. government will remain
open, for now. Congress today sent President
Obama a short-term spending bill to fund agencies
through next Wednesday. The move buys more
time to negotiate a $1.1 trillion long-term
tax and spending bill.
House lawmakers on both sides remained optimistic
that a budget deal could be reached by next
week.
REP. JARED POLIS (D), Colorado: The Republicans
have previously shown this country their willingness
to go into a shutdown. So, I hope that we
take this new five-day period to avoid a shutdown
permanently, rather than just to do another
three or five days again and again and again.
REP. TOM COLE (R), Oklahoma: Writing a $1.1
trillion omnibus bill takes a lot of time.
And there's multiple items to be negotiated.
Now, I think both sides is negotiating in
good faith in this legislative body, and I
think the administration is participating
in good faith.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Negotiators remain divided,
though, over additional unrelated provisions
that some lawmakers are trying to attach to
the bill. They include new environmental rules
on carbon emissions and efforts to stem the
flow of Syrian refugees into the United States.
Two giants in the chemical industry, DuPont
and Dow Chemical, have officially announced
they're merging. The fusion of two of America's
oldest companies is valued at $130 billion.
The new entity will be split into three separate
companies, focused on agriculture, materials,
and specialty products. But the deal still
requires the approval of federal regulators.
The price of oil plunged to near seven-year
lows today. It closed at $35.62 a barrel in
New York, down more than 3 percent. The drop
has been driven by increased U.S. production,
an abundant global supply, and the strength
of the U.S. dollar. And it triggered a sell-off
on Wall Street. The Dow Jones industrial average
plummeted over 309 points to close at 17265.
The Nasdaq fell more than 111 points, and
the S&P 500 lost nearly 40 points.
For the week, the Nasdaq and the S&P were
down roughly 4 percent. The Dow fell more
than 3 percent.
High-stakes global climate talks on the outskirts
of Paris are dragging into an extra day. Negotiations
were scheduled to wrap today, but disagreements
remain over who should bear the most burden
in reducing emissions and whether rich countries
should be responsible for most of the cost.
Diplomats from over 190 nations were trying
to reach a deal, and the summit's president,
French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, said
the time is right.
LAURENT FABIUS, French Foreign Minister (through
translator): All the conditions are there
for us to reach a universal, ambitious agreement,
and observers will recognize that the conditions
have probably never been so favorable. Now
it's the ministers' responsibility to make
their choice tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fabius is expected to present
a new version of the draft accord Saturday
morning.
Heightened security measures remained in place
in Geneva, Switzerland today, amid an ongoing
hunt for possible terror suspects linked to
the Islamic State. At Geneva's airport, bomb
squads detonated abandoned luggage as a precaution.
A few miles away, armed guards remained vigilant
outside the United Nations building.
Officials warned the enhanced security could
last for the foreseeable future.
PIERRE MAUDET, Geneva Minister of Economy
and Security (through translator): For us,
this is a pretty sustained effort for police
forces. There are actions in several parts
of the town: bomb alerts, a need to reinforce
police troops, and we have the capacity to
maintain this level for a certain number of
days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Authorities said they're searching
for at least four suspects believed to be
plotting a specific attack in the city. Local
news media reported the two Syrian nationals
were arrested today in Geneva after traces
of explosives were found in their car, but
it's not clear if they were linked to the
manhunt.
Back in this country, officials are scouring
for red flags they missed before last week's
shooting in San Bernardino. The Associated
Press reported that authorities didn't pick
up on extremist messages that were exchanged
online between the two killers, Syed Farook
and Tashfeen Malik, two years ago.
Meanwhile, an FBI dive team again searched
a small lake some three miles from the attack
site, looking for a computer hard drive that
may have been dumped.
And there were competing court rulings in
New York today over two daily fantasy sports
Web sites. At first, a judge banned the sites
DraftKings and FanDuel from doing business
in the state. That was after New York's attorney
general argued that the games were illegal
gambling. But, later, a state appeals court
judge said the sites could continue to operate
for now, while the issue is fully considered.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": the British
defense secretary on joining the fight against
ISIS; a swift backlash against Muslims in
America; the human cost of building the nation's
nuclear arsenal; and much more.
The United States and its coalition partners
have been fighting the Islamic State group
for 16 months to beat back the group's gains
in both Syria and Iraq.
At the same time, Syria's many-sided civil
war continues unabated. Russia has inserted
itself to support the regime of its ally President
Bashar al-Assad. And last week, the United
Kingdom said that it would join the U.S. and
France in bombing Islamic State in Syria as
the militant group has begun attacks on the
West.
All this comes as a major diplomatic push
to end the nearly-five-year-old brutal war
is under way, and the American and British
defense secretaries at the Pentagon.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense Secretary: We
will defeat ISIL, and we will ensure that
they stay defeated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of Defense Ash Carter
hosted his British counterpart, Michael Fallon,
to chart the coalition's progress in the campaign
against the Islamic State group.
Fallon said British sorties have been aimed
at ISIS fighters and the oil fields the group
uses, in part, to finance itself. After the
Paris attacks, as France began airstrikes
in Syria, Britain's Parliament approved expanding
the U.K.'s existing Iraq air campaign into
Syria as well.
Meanwhile, today in Moscow, Russian President
Vladimir Putin spoke about his country's war
in Syria. For the first time, he said that
Russian aircraft are now helping a rebel group,
the U.S.-backed Free Syrian Army.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian President (through
translator): The activities of our aviation
group assists in uniting the efforts of government
troops and the Free Syrian Army.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in Washington, State Department
spokesman John Kirby said those claims were
unverified, but noted that, in the past, Russia
has targeted those groups. Fallon echoed Kirby
on that point.
MICHAEL FALLON, U.K. Defense Secretary: What
they have got to do is stop propping up the
Assad regime, stop bombing opposition groups
who are opposed to the Assad regime, stop
dropping unguided munitions on innocent villages
and groups who have been fighting Assad, and
get behind the political process that is now
under way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earlier today, I sat down with
Britain's defense secretary to discuss the
war effort at the residence of the British
ambassador here in Washington.
Defense Secretary Michael Fallon, thank you
very much for talking with us.
MICHAEL FALLON: Good morning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, for Americans who weren't
following closely the vote in your Parliament
last week to authorize the expansion of airstrikes
against ISIS from Iraq into Syria, what was
it that led to the decision to go against
what had seemed to be an anti-interventionist
policy in your country?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, I think a growing recognition
that this border between Iraq and Syria is
not recognized by ISIL itself, and it's completely
artificial and rather odd to be carrying out
airstrikes on one side of the border, but
the Royal Air Force having to turn back at
the border and not follow through the other
side of the border.
It was also a response to France and the United
States and other countries that wanted Britain
to step up its contribution to the campaign.
And I'm delighted we're now able to do that.
We have doubled the number of strike aircraft
that we have in theater. And we're upping
the tempo of our missions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You started the air campaign
right away, after the vote. It just happened
within hours. What have been the main targets
and how successful has it been so far?
MICHAEL FALLON: We have focused those strikes
very much on the infrastructure that supports
ISIS, the oil wells, for example, the supply
routes, the depots, the arms dumps, the logistics,
the command and control, because we need to
degrade the infrastructure and the revenue
that supports the supporting organization.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Has it been -- how successful
has it been?
MICHAEL FALLON: The strikes we have carried
out so far have been successful. They have
been mainly in the oil fields of Eastern Syria.
We have been hitting oil wellheads, and those
strikes, yes, have been successful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The question then arises, there's
been an air campaign in Iraq against ISIS
for a year or more. There's been some progress,
but it's been limited. What makes you believe
that expanding into Syria, that this campaign
is going to be any more successful?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, this was never going
to be a quick campaign. It was your own Secretary
Kerry who said he thought the campaign in
Iraq might last at least three years, and
we're not halfway through that yet, but progress
is being made.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But can ISIS be defeated with
an air campaign? Are ground forces going to
be necessary for this to work in the end?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, ground forces are being
deployed in Iraq, where there is the Iraqi
army, there are Kurdish forces who are helping
to liberate these towns, like Tikrit and Baiji,
which have already fallen. And ISIL have been
pushed back out of those towns.
Now, we want eventually the same to happen
on the Syrian side of this very artificial
line. But, meantime, there's a lot that airstrikes
can do to help cut off ISIS' source of revenue
and to help squeeze the noose around its headquarters
in Raqqa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, when is the right time
for there to be a larger ground force presence
in Syria, and will Britain be part of that,
will the U.K. be part of that?
MICHAEL FALLON: We're not going to put our
own troops on the ground there. And, indeed,
in Iraq, they have made it very clear they
don't want British or even -- with respect,
they don't want American troops there, because
they feel that would simply radicalize Sunni
opinion even more.
In the end, this has to be done -- this territory
has to be liberated and held by local forces
that enjoy the confidence of the local community,
particularly the Sunni areas. And that has
to be done locally. And the way to do that
is to bring the civil war to an end and to
use moderate Syrian groups to help defeat
ISIS up in the northeast corner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But hasn't that been a goal
for a long time, and it just hasn't been achieved?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, just in the last few
months, we have seen real progress there,
everybody involved now coming together, a
conference in Saudi Arabia this week, just
this week, bringing all the parties involved,
and countries like Russia, Iran, Saudi Arabia
that all have an interest now beginning to
think their way through to a new Syria that
is without Assad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Assad, President Assad,
shows no desire whatsoever to leave. He's
been supported completely by Russia and by
Iran. Is there new indication that that support
has changed, is falling away?
MICHAEL FALLON: Yes, we're beginning to see
signs that that is weakening. People are beginning
to think their way towards a different kind
of Syria and recognize that he can't be part
of the long-term future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is Russia's involvement militarily
in Syria helping this campaign or hurting
it?
MICHAEL FALLON: It's extremely unhelpful,
because, of course, they came into the civil
war, and they have been bombing moderate opposition
groups that have been standing up to Assad,
instead of attacking ISIS alongside the rest
of us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you about domestic
terrorism.
Your country has -- saw the real threat of
domestic terrorism well before the United
States did with this most recent attack in
San Bernardino. What lessons has Great Britain,
has the United Kingdom learned from your own
experience?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, we have seen these -- alongside
your own shooting, we have had these terrible
shootings in Paris just two hours away from
us, and earlier in the summer, we had 30 of
our own holiday-makers slaughtered on a beach
in Tunisia.
So this is very real to us. These attacks
are directed, organized, inspired, financed
from ISIS in its headquarters in Syria. And
that's one reason why we have now committed
ourselves to this campaign in full across
both Iraq and Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about those individuals
who are inspired, who may not be directed
by ISIS, but who are inspired by their message,
by their philosophy to commit acts of terror
in your country?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, we have a program of
-- aimed at tackling radicalization. We call
it the Prevent program to try and identify
much earlier those who are likely to end up
as potential terrorists, to identify them
in the schools, at the colleges, in the madrasas,
and working with moderate Muslim communities
to see who these people are and see what we
can do to make sure they don't go along that
journey of being mildly, mildly Islamist to
being extreme.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think it's widely accepted
that there has been a greater effort to integrate
Muslims into U.S. society than there has been
in European countries, including the U.K.
Are there lessons that your country is learning
from the U.S. about integrating Muslims into
society that makes you stronger when it comes
to standing up to this extremist...
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, that is exactly the
challenge.
The United States is a great open society,
and you have found a way of embracing different
faiths and different immigrants from different
countries and making them all Americans. And
we need to work harder than that -- about
that in Western Europe, and avoiding the kind
of ghettoization of different groups that
can lead to these tensions, and make it more
difficult to challenge extremist behavior
later on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of Defense Michael
Fallon, we thank you for talking with us.
MICHAEL FALLON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we get the perspective
of those Muslims in America, a community under
assault in the wake of recent attacks.
Just this afternoon, there was a fire at a
mosque in Southern California. The imam said
there was a loud boom, and the building had
been firebombed.
It is the latest in a string of violence directed
at Muslims.
The "NewsHour"'s P.J. Tobia has our story.
AYA LAOFIR, High School Student: I pray five
times a day, which I don't get to do at school,
but I come home and pray. I do my homework,
read a little bit, and then I go to bed.
P.J. TOBIA: Fifteen-year-old Aya Laofir, is
just like any other American teenager. At
school, being Muslim just isn't a big deal.
AYA LAOFIR: Overall, I think, you know, school
is good when it comes to me and my scarf.
P.J. TOBIA: But on the way home, sometimes,
there is trouble.
AYA LAOFIR: There is this man who sits on
the sidewalk sometimes, and he starts, you
know, harassing -- well, not harassing me,
well, calling me names and telling me to go
back to my country.
P.J. TOBIA: She lives in Northern Virginia,
one of the most culturally diverse regions
in the nation, according to the last census.
AYA LAOFIR: As I'm walking, and I see people,
they duck their heads, or when I smile at
them, they don't smile back, I'm just like,
oh, is it because I'm wearing my scarf? Is
it because of what's on the news?
P.J. TOBIA: What's on the news is a series
of terrorist attacks, most recently in Paris,
France, and San Bernardino, California, killings
in the name of the Islamic State.
In response, the temperature of America's
political climate is rising. Leading Republican
presidential candidate Donald Trump has proposed
to temporarily ban all Muslims from entering
the country, a policy which one in four Americans
now support, according to an NBC poll.
And it's not just Trump. Other leading GOP
candidates have also made comments that have
upset American Muslims. As a result, many
like Aya, now feel unsafe.
In Irving, Texas, one group has been holding
regular protests in front of an Islamic center
since late November, brandishing semiautomatic
rifles, some wearing masks. The protesters
want to stop what they call the Islamization
of America.
In Pittsburgh, a Moroccan immigrant taxi driver
was shot after his passenger asked him about
the Islamic State. And in Northern Virginia,
this outburst happened at a community meeting
for a planned Islamic center.
MAN: Nobody, nobody, nobody wants your evil
cult in this county. And I'll tell you. Let
me tell you what.
(APPLAUSE)
MAN: I will do everything in my power to make
sure that doesn't -- does not happen.
MAN: We don't want it.
MAN: Because you are terrorists. Every one
of you are terrorists. I don't care what you
say.
P.J. TOBIA: A recent New York Times/CBS poll
found Americans more worried about a terrorist
attack than at any time since 9/11, worries
that are also present in Muslim communities
around the country.
Aya's family mosque, the Dar Al-Hijrah Center,
has been the target of violence. Last month,
someone threw smoke bombs and a Molotov cocktail
over the fence in the middle of the night.
The mosque's leader, Imam Johari Abdul-Malik,
says they have been through this before and
could almost see the violence coming.
IMAM JOHARI ABDUL-MALIK, Dar Al-Hijrah Center:
We have this sense of a rising anti-Muslim-specific
intolerance after the Paris attacks. This
community immediately went on high alert in
preparation for a backlash.
P.J. TOBIA: Imam Johari invited us to stay
after evening prayers to speak with congregants.
Theraiah Hussein (ph) is a mother of six.
WOMAN: Everything changed, even starting from
my kids' school, because that's what we care
about, being called terrorists, being called
ISIS, and being called bad names. And that's
what really killed me.
MALIK OSMAN, Student: Somebody just called
me a terrorist because they saw me walking.
P.J. TOBIA: An adult person or another kid?
MALIK OSMAN: A child. I was really scared
from then on. And that's why I don't wear
a head scarf.
P.J. TOBIA: So, you don't wear a head scarf
because someone called you a terrorist? How
does that make you feel?
MALIK OSMAN: It makes me feel really angry,
like, awkward.
P.J. TOBIA: Aya's father, Badr, watched with
dread as the news of the San Bernardino attacks
unfolded.
BADR LAOFIR, Father of Aya: We start praying
-- inside, I'm sure you would be doing the
same thing -- that the shooter is not a Muslim,
but, of course, he's a Muslim. So, another
wave is going to start, and people, the media,
and every time, like every time.
P.J. TOBIA: Badr is vigilant about his family.
He has a strategy for the simplest of tasks,
like the neighborhood walk.
BADR LAOFIR: I tell my wife and my daughter,
if she walks, she doesn't -- she needs to
walk when a lot of people are around. And
a parking lot here, she's always with one
of the -- my kids, always cell phone on hand.
Sometimes, people can attack you and follow
you and attack you even if -- in the place
where you live in.
EDWIN ROESSLER, Fairfax County, Virginia,
Police Chief: Where there is fear and anxiety,
the role of law enforcement is to come in,
and to alleviate that and provide a sense
of security.
P.J. TOBIA: Fairfax County Police Chief Edwin
Roessler says after an attack like San Bernardino,
local law enforcement must be proactive.
EDWIN ROESSLER: And we contact the mosque
and we say, we're going to increase patrols.
Do you want us to show up at events? And it's
a two-way partnership.
P.J. TOBIA: Public officials across the U.S.
have asked the Muslim community to take a
lead role in addressing the issue of radicalization,
including President Obama in a prime-time
address.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States:
Muslim leaders here and around the globe have
to continue working with us to decisively
and unequivocally reject the hateful ideology
that groups like ISIL and al-Qaida promote.
P.J. TOBIA: Not everyone agrees.
ROSA RAD, Washington, D.C., Resident: I find
it to be incredibly offensive.
P.J. TOBIA: Rosa Rad, 23, lives in a trendy
Washington, D.C., neighborhood.
ROSA RAD: To have to be, like, vigilant and
have to be super aware of what's going on
is bizarre. I don't see any other communities
being given that responsibility. And I think
everyone needs to be vigilant and to be aware.
By singling out the Muslim community, you're
not doing anything but perpetuating that negative
-- negative view that people already probably
already have towards Muslims.
P.J. TOBIA: The vitriol has even been felt
outside of Muslim communities. In Manassas,
Virginia, about 30 miles West of Washington,
D.C., the local mosque has been repeatedly
vandalized. After the San Bernardino attacks,
a death threat was phoned in.
It has made some non-Muslim residents more
than a little uncomfortable. Patty Reed works
at a local hardware store.
PATTY REED, Virginia: Gosh, it just makes
us look like a bunch of rednecks. I'm going
to be honest. And I don't like it. Why we
wouldn't be able to talk to these people,
talk to -- you know, voice our concerns?
P.J. TOBIA: But many are scared, saying recent
events have them on edge.
WOMAN: If you're somebody who is doing the
right thing and you're here in the right way,
then it truly isn't fair to you. But things
happen. You know, it isn't fair to us what's
going on either, but -- or those people that
died, but it's what's going on in the world
today.
P.J. TOBIA: But inside the vandalized Manassas
Mosque, its leader, Imam Abu Nahidian, says
he has used the moment to teach faith and
acceptance.
IMAM ABU NAHIDIAN, Manassas Mosque: Remember,
it takes two to tango. Both hand has to make
a noise. One hand has -- if one side is a
little bit off the track, go with them, be
kind to them. These are the orders of the
holy Koran. All of them -- it's loaded with
them. Therefore, we have to go ahead and talk
to them that the reason that you're scared
of me is you, not me. I didn't do anything
to scare you, so take that away from your
heart.
P.J. TOBIA: In fact, he says the events of
the recent weeks have revealed some of the
best of this rural community. This bouquet
of flowers, like the threatening phone call,
came from an anonymous sender, but with a
different message.
"You don't know me," the card reads. "As a
white Christian, please know that my family
will continue to stand with yours."
Meanwhile, high school freshman Aya Laofir
has taken to writing poetry in response to
the hate.
AYA LAOFIR: "So, Donald Trump, come forth
and into the light. Open your eyes and heart.
This is the United States of America. Do not
start tearing it apart."
P.J. TOBIA: For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm P.J.
Tobia in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": Paul Ryan's first
major fight as speaker, to prevent a government
shutdown; and Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze this week's news.
But, first, a new investigation that examines
casualties of the Cold War, and the scope
of those injured or killed while working with
or around nuclear material.
That's the focus of a series of reports out
today from McClatchy News. Reporters in 10
states spent a year chronicling and documenting
what happened to workers in the U.S. nuclear
facilities from the 1940s right up until today.
Jeffrey Brown has the story, and he recorded
this conversation a short time ago.
JEFFREY BROWN: McClatchy's team found the
federal government had never fully reveal
the true toll of what happened to men and
women working at nuclear facilities.
Back in 2001, the government set up a compensation
fund for some of those workers. The investigation
found that more than 33,000 of them have died
from related illnesses. That's more than four
times the number of Americans killed in the
Iraq and Afghanistan wars.
And there were more than 100,000 Americans
diagnosed with cancer and other diseases after
helping to build the country's nuclear stockpile
over the decades.
Lindsay Wise is one of the leading reporters
on the McClatchy team. She joins me now.
And welcome to you.
Want to fill in the picture first. What kind
of work and workers were most impacted, most
exposed?
LINDSAY WISE, McClatchy Washington Bureau:
Well, these were workers at plants, more than
300 plants all over the country.
They did everything from pipe fitting and
production work, blue-collar work, to nuclear
physicists and scientists. And we even found
in our database some CEOs who ran the contracting
companies that managed the plant.
JEFFREY BROWN: You refer to this as a hidden
legacy. It's a little known casualty of the
Cold War, but how much was known?
LINDSAY WISE: Well, this is what I found so
interesting working on this project, which
was that I feel like when we talk about the
Cold War and the history of the Cold War,
we often talk about it as though it was a
war without any casualties, without any American
casualties.
And what we were able to do at McClatchy is
we obtained a database from the Department
of Labor for the compensation program, and
we were able to crunch the numbers and analyze
the data, and find the number of people who
had applied and then been compensated for
illnesses and died.
And so that told us that there were people
who gave their lives as part of the Cold War.
JEFFREY BROWN: And within the scientific community,
within the government over the decades, how
much awareness, how much study had been going
on?
LINDSAY WISE: I think that, when this program
was created in 2001, there had been some awareness
in Congress leading up to, and it was created
through the efforts of the Clinton administration
to compensate workers who had become ill.
It started to become apparent that many of
these workers had been exposed to dangerous
subjects, radioactivity and other toxins,
without realizing it or without knowing the
full extent of the health hazards that they
were facing.
And so once that started to come to light
through some research of some reporters, The
Washington Post and other places, there was
pressure in Congress to pass a fund to compensate
the workers.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, you went and talked to
many of those workers.
And you found a mix of pride in the work they
had done, right, but also bitterness in some
cases over what they didn't know.
So, you did -- we have a clip of one of the
workers. He's from the Hanford site. His name
is Tom Peterson. And he was exposed to levels
of beryllium. Explain first what beryllium
is, and then we will watch that clip.
LINDSAY WISE: Beryllium is a hazardous metal
used in weapons production.
And it -- machined or worked with, it can
produce byproducts of dust that can be inhaled
by the workers. And there was a long time
where I don't think the full dangers of beryllium
were understood. And workers have been exposed
to this dust. And when they breathe it in,
there are some people who have an allergic
reaction.
And this creates scarring in their lungs,
so that they develop a -- many of them develop
a serious respiratory disease from that, that
can be fatal.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, let's look at that
clip.
TOM PETERSON, Former Ironworker: I started
working in Hanford in 1978 as an ironworker.
Nobody knew they were being exposed to beryllium
or what the consequences are.
MAN: So, the beryllium hazards were not well-recognized
early on. The problem is that some people
are susceptible to very small amounts of beryllium.
TOM PETERSON: All of a sudden, I couldn't
finish mowing the lawn. I couldn't breathe.
Come to find out beryllium is all over the
Hanford site.
This legacy of beryllium contamination that
nobody knew anything about, they kept quiet
about. Your future is not real bright, but
it would have been nice to have been told
about beryllium before we found out at a meeting.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, this compensation fund
has run into various kinds of criticism. Right?
It's not enough, some people think. It's too
bureaucratic, some people think.
And on the other hand, there is some cases
where the suggestion is, there is overcompensation,
because the direct link hasn't been proven.
LINDSAY WISE: I think that in order for Congress
to create this compensation program, they
did have -- the Department of Energy did have
to submit studies to show that workers in
the nuclear facilities around the country
were susceptible to higher rates of cancers
and non-malignant diseases.
One of the things we did when we looked at
this data was, we really looked at the government's
threshold for deciding a claim was valid that
it was more likely than not that a worker
had gotten sick from something they did on
the job. And we used those numbers to come
up with the death statistics.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you, finally, you're
looking at past experience, but this is very
relevant still, right, because of a major
modernization program under way.
What lessons learned either by you or by -- more
importantly, I guess, by the government and
by the people doing this kind of work still?
LINDSAY WISE: Well, we took a look at not
just the workers from the past who worked
on the Manhattan Project or the Cold War,
but also right up to the present day.
And what we found was that there were 186,000
workers in today -- since the program was
created who work in weapons plants and research
facilities today that are -- had been exposed
to registerable levels of radiation just day
to day.
And some of those people have exceeded the
limit for -- that the Department of Energy
had set as safe. Other workers we spoke to
were concerned that they were given -- they
were told that their dosage from certain accidents
or exposures was a certain amount, but they
felt that they were either being lied to or
that documents and records had been falsified.
And we did find, when we reviewed contractor
misconduct, files that there were some cases
where contractors had falsified radiation
records of workers right up until -- I think
the most recent case we looked at was 2013.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, an ongoing situation.
LINDSAY WISE: Mm-hmm.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lindsay Wise of McClatchy News,
thanks so much.
LINDSAY WISE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two key federal agencies responded
to the "NewsHour" after Jeff's interview.
The Department of Energy praised workers for
their sacrifices and said its safety record
has improved due to better monitoring and
new protective limits at its sites and those
of its contractors.
The Department of Labor said that its processing
of compensation claims is faster now, with
many of the cases resolved within 180 days.
The department also said that it has paid
over $12 billion to more than 100,000 people
to -- quote -- "compensate for their suffering."
Now we turn to newly-elected speaker of the
House of Representatives, Republican Paul
Ryan.
He promises to overhaul internal House procedures,
giving rank-and-file members more say. And
he's laying out an agenda for his party. Ryan
is already facing one of his biggest challenges,
keeping the government running.
Our political director, Lisa Desjardins, reports.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the House:
What's next?
LISA DESJARDINS: Paul Ryan is on a roll. In
his first four working weeks, the new speaker
presided over passage of a $600 billion defense
bill, a plan to tighten screening of Syrian
refugees, and a five-year highway bill, the
types of big controversial bills that had
been stuck in Capitol gridlock sometimes for
years.
REP. PAUL RYAN: I became speaker just over
a month ago, and I would like to think we
have hit the ground running. We are dealing
with everything from highways, to ISIS, to
funding the government.
LISA DESJARDINS: This wasn't the plan for
the 45-year-old from Wisconsin. He'd just
started his dream job as chairman of the tax-writing
Ways and Means Committee. But the father of
three young children agreed to become speaker,
thanks to two chaotic weeks when sharply divided
Republicans could not agree on anyone else.
REP. PAUL RYAN: Thursday was a great day.
Thursday was a day where we came together
as a conference and unified, and agreed to
proceed together with a vision.
LISA DESJARDINS: And his vision is about ideas.
Ryan is a student of political philosophy,
influenced by his mentor, the late conservative
Jack Kemp, who saw free markets and tax cuts
as the best antidotes to poverty, and Ayn
Rand, the divisive author who stressed individualism.
Ryan is an admirer, but has been careful to
say he doesn't fully embrace her philosophy.
He is a bootstraps conservative, setting out
to retool not just the Republican House, but
the Republican agenda itself.
REP. PAUL RYAN: Put together a positive agenda,
and take it to the American people. Give the
people of this country the choice that they
have been yearning for.
LISA DESJARDINS: But as Ryan aims to win Americans'
confidence, Democrats say he is dangerous.
REP. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN (D), Maryland: He is
more hard-edged ideologically than Speaker
Boehner was. Speaker Boehner was a rock-ribbed
-- rock-ribbed conservative. Paul Ryan had
sharper ideological edges.
LISA DESJARDINS: Congressman Chris Van Hollen
may be the Democrat who knows Ryan the best,
after four years of working as his Democratic
counterpart on the House Budget Committee.
Van Hollen says Ryan's agenda is extreme,
including his Medicare plan that would end
the senior health care program as it exists
now and replace it with limited-amount vouchers.
REP. CHRIS VAN HOLLEN: It would do great damage
to Medicare. It would end the Medicare guarantee.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ryan argues that, without
such changes, Medicare will go bankrupt. It's
a pragmatic, mathematical view. And that wins
him love from conservatives. But those same
conservatives are also his biggest challenge.
REP. SEAN DUFFY (R), Wisconsin: This is Paul
Ryan's real first big test.
LISA DESJARDINS: Fellow Wisconsin Congressman
Sean Duffy is talking about the government
funding fight, a fight that is electrified
with red-hot conservative issues, including
Planned Parenthood funding and how to screen
refugees.
REP. SEAN DUFFY: These packages, they're never
great. They're big, they're long, they spend
a lot of money. This thing's going to stink
no matter the way you look at it, and Paul
Ryan is going to have to make it smell as
rosy and lilacy as possible. We will see how
well he does.
LISA DESJARDINS: This kind of battle has paralyzed
the House and its leaders for years. Do Republicans
take a hard stance that they know the president
will block, risking a government shutdown,
or do they fund the government, at the expense
of their own values? Do they compromise or
do they dig in?
REP. ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN (R), Florida: That's
why sort of threading that needle in a very
careful way. He's surfing his way through
some very big surf that our GOP Caucus is
throwing at him.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republican Congresswoman
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen believes Ryan is succeeding.
REP. ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN: People are trusting
him. Yes, there's going to see how it all
works out, but, as of now, even the most malcontent
and discontented Republican member, of which
we have a few -- you're never going to make
everybody happy -- has got to see that he's
really trying his best to make the process
work.
LISA DESJARDINS: And process is key. House
Speaker John Boehner was ousted, in part,
due to complaints from conservatives who felt
that leadership ignored them. Now Ryan is
changing House process.
A few big items, giving members what's called
regular order. That means opportunities for
everyone to propose and vote on more amendments,
and for committees, not party leaders, to
drive debates. Also, to engage everyone, he
added one more all-member meeting each week.
Congressman Dave Brat was one of the unsure
conservatives who didn't vote for Ryan as
speaker, but he says, so far, he is impressed.
REP. DAVE BRAT (R), Virginia: So, next year,
we anticipate regular order. That's a huge
gain. I'm on the House Freedom Caucus. We
have been fighting for that and that bottom-up
leadership.
LISA DESJARDINS: But in a time of threats
from Islamic State, concerns over immigration,
and continued job fears, process only goes
so far. Ryan is challenging his party to come
up with a clear agenda.
REP. PAUL RYAN: If we want a mandate, then
we need to offer ideas. And if we want to
offer ideas, then we need to actually have
ideas.
LISA DESJARDINS: As he pushes for new ideas,
Ryan is also tackling his party's identity
now: pushing back against presidential GOP
front-runner Donald Trump, and Trump's call
to block Muslims from entering the United
States.
REP. PAUL RYAN: Normally, I do not comment
on what's going on in the presidential election.
I will take an exception today. This is not
conservatism. What was proposed yesterday
is not what this party stands for, and, more
importantly, it's not what this country stands
for.
REP. ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN: He's going to improve
our Republican brand. I hate to use that word
brand, but that's the way people look at this
nowadays. And it's been tarnished, and we're
going to earn that Good Housekeeping Seal
of Approval again.
LISA DESJARDINS: Those are big national goals.
But first, of course, the new speaker must
keep government running. The funding deadline
is just days away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa joins us now from
Capitol Hill.
So, Lisa, whatever Speaker Ryan is able to
get done this year, we know -- and you mentioned
it -- 2016 is an election year. Typically,
Congress practically grinds to a halt during
election years.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are the expectations for
him then?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, I think Paul Ryan is
looking at this election year in a very different
way from most speakers of the House, Judy.
I spoke to one of his senior aides tonight,
who said that Speaker Ryan thinks the party
may not have a nominee until June or after,
and that that is way too long for the party
to wait to really spell out an agenda. So
here comes Speaker Ryan. He's ready to step
in and is planning to try and articulate some
policy, some proposals early next year, even
as Republicans are fighting for the White
House.
He could be wading into some tricky waters,
but even though Speaker Ryan is not running
for president, it seems he could be a major
architect for whoever does become their candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just very quickly on this
budget shutdown, what does it look like? Are
they going to keep the government open?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
Well, the lights are still on here. And they're
going to be on actually a lot this weekend.
There will be staffers around the clock this
weekend trying to work out dozens of still
hitches, different items that the two parties
need to agree on.
Next week, we will know a lot more. So far,
it looks like they could work this out. But,
Judy, while the deadline has been moved to
next Wednesday, I will make a little prediction.
It might get moved again. We will see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That would be a shock.
(LAUGHTER)
LISA DESJARDINS: Imagine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins, thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to the analysis of
Shields and Brooks. That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York Times columnist
David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, let's talk about Paul Ryan for minute.
Mark, how is he doing?
MARK SHIELDS: He's doing fine, Judy, until
-- this is a test coming up, of course, with
the budgeting, keeping the federal government
open.
He's got a certain honeymoon period. And I
think he's been the beneficiary. First of
all, he has to deal with the Freedom Caucus
and the conservatives who were the bane of
John Boehner.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The bane of John Boehner.
MARK SHIELDS: And I think he's benefited,
in a strange way, by the chaos created by
Donald Trump.
He looks, in comparison, by -- a grownup.
And I think, at the same time, that, for the
first time, there is nervousness and anxiety
among Republicans that they could lose their
congressional majorities next November.
So, there is less tolerance, perhaps, for
all the hissy fits and tantrums that have
been thrown by House members in the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Contrast with Boehner?
DAVID BROOKS: It is.
First of all, I have to say there are very
few successful Republican beards. And I think
he's pulling it off. So, that's very important
to the brand.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Not since Lincoln, maybe, have
we had a good Republican beard.
But he -- the way you believe something is
as important as what you believe. What Chris
Van Hollen said in that piece, that he is
more conservative than John Boehner, that
is certainly true. But he is more communicative.
He's also just warmer. And he's ostentatiously
respectful to other people.
And so just that manner has helped him. It's
also helped him, frankly, that Boehner did
a lot of the heavy lifting on the government
shutdown stuff before he left, on raising
the spending caps and some of that other stuff,
so it will be a lot easier. And that's a tribute
to what Boehner did before he walked out the
door there.
And then the devolution of power is just big.
You are managing an organization. And you
give some people some control over what they're
doing. I would say, since I came to Washington,
in almost every institution, power has grown
more and more centralized, either in the White
House or in Congress or in agencies, smaller
zones of trust.
And so to reverse that is kind of revolutionary
and kind of impressive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if you look at -- as David
just said, you're looking at Paul Ryan as
someone who is more conservative than the
leadership the Republicans had before, so
you would think there would be more push and
pull, but it looks like he's trying to get
things done.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, he is trying to get things
done.
But it comes down to the continuing resolution.
This is the maximum power that a minority
who are in opposition or have a particular
case, a cause or point of view, for them to
exercise it and to influence the threat.
The Republicans could not have a shutdown
of the government right now. They can't. And
so he's got to limit...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why not? Why not?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, because this is a party
that, quite frankly, right now is on the cusp
of a nervous breakdown, I think it's fair
to say, with the Trump candidacy and what's
going on and just the rhetoric in that whole
debate.
You heard Ileana Ros-Lehtinen say in her piece
to Lisa the Republican brand, that she looks
to Paul Ryan to save the Republican brand,
which is damaged. And so he's got to get that
done. So -- and this is the time where you
bring up riders. Riders are the last children,
really, of special legislation.
There's not supposed to be a rider on appropriations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: These are issues that are separate
from...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: They're not supposed to be on
appropriation, but everybody wants to bring
up his cause right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: And so that's the problem he
faces.
He's got to get it done. They want to see
him succeed. And they don't want him to fail.
He does have one great advantage. And that
is that he didn't plot and scheme to get this
job. It was really thrust upon him. So I think
that's an advantage, that he didn't crawl
all over -- crawl over carcasses and corpses
to get there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When it comes to Trump, David,
I know we have been talking about him, but
this week, with the statement about keeping
Muslims out of the country, is this just more
of the same of what we have been hearing from
Donald Trump, or are we hearing something
at a completely new level?
DAVID BROOKS: I think it's a different level.
The man is a genius for attention, an addict
of attention, and therefore a genius of getting
it. And so this I think is a different level
for a couple of reasons. First, it is bigotry
of a naked sort. The Mexican stuff was bigotry,
too, but this strikes me as a higher level.
Second, an offense against religious liberty.
And, third, because of the way Trump has now
risen to prominence, it has reverberations
around the globe, in the way the stuff even
he said earlier about Latin Americans didn't.
And so it's done enormous damage to America's
reputation abroad. And so I do it's something
different. Politically, it's a total winner.
I mean, let's be clear. The polls show it,
and for a number of reasons.
People, as we heard earlier in the program,
are scared about terrorism. Secondly, there
has been a pent-up, silent frustration about
political correctness. So anybody who says
something politically completely incorrect,
and properly incorrect, for some people, that's
like a liberation. It's, finally, somebody's
saying the truth.
And so he's benefiting from that. And so it's
right now a total winner on the Republican
primary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And if it's a winner -- and,
Mark, the polls do show that -- I think I
saw 40-some percent of Republicans agree with
his statement.
But when you talk about the electorate overall,
it's only about 20-something percent.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
No, it's a real problem for the Republicans,
Judy. It's a problem for the country. I mean,
we saw it this week. Karl Rove, George Bush's
amanuensis, his master strategist, said that
-- wrote that the nomination of Donald Trump
is a gift to the Democrats and would doom
the Republicans.
We saw 20 Republican leaders, as reported
by Robert Costa in The Washington Post, had
a secret meeting, that they were that concerned,
that anxious to somehow provoke and guarantee
that there will be a brokered convention in
Cleveland next summer to do anything, apparently,
to deny him the nomination.
What he did this week, with -- talked about
as being intemperate, or being outrageous,
or ethnic slurs -- this really, to use a term
I'm reluctant to use, was un-American. I mean,
religious tolerance is in the citizenship
papers of this country. It was put there by
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, specifically
to include Jews and nonbelievers and Muslims.
It wasn't -- so that it wasn't simply Christians
or Protestants of a certain sectarian -- and
so, I mean, this was just -- this was really
so offensive and so outrageous. I mean, when
-- and I thought the timid and rather tepid
reaction of a lot of Republicans -- when Dick
Cheney becomes the moral templar of your party
to say this is unacceptable, and I think a
word has to be said on behalf of both Cheney
and George W. Bush, that, after 9/11, they
deliberately, consciously didn't bring any
-- made sure that this would have a religious
element to it, the war in Iraq, the ill-fated
war in Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What effect -- David, you said,
short-term, it helps him politically, but
what effect is it having on this race? How
is it changing the shape of this presidential...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, first, on the Republican Party, it doesn't
-- not -- looking at the data, it doesn't
seem to be bleeding over into hurting the
Republican brand. If you look at the party
approval, it pretty much where it was. It's
slightly up where it was three or four months
ago.
People may disapprove of Donald Trump, but,
so far, they don't see him as a typical Republican,
maybe because he's running against the party.
I continue to believe -- and I will believe
to my dying day -- that he will -- his numbers
will collapse. I have said it here on a weekly
basis, and I don't think any of this matters
until the final months.
But events like Paris...
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're getting close.
DAVID BROOKS: We're getting close. And events
like Paris -- and his genius for attention
-- what he does is, he takes a concrete issue
or a broad issue which is complicated and
he turns it into sometimes brutal and sometimes
horrific simplicity.
And so there is this broad fear of security
and terrorism. He -- specifically Muslims,
and that, like, lodges in people's minds as
something simple and bold, and somehow he
seems to some people like a strong leader.
Do you hate women? The question that was asked
to him in one of the debates. No, just Rosie
O'Donnell. How much money are you worth? He
could say 6.8 million -- he says $10 billion.
So, there's a genius for attention by turning
everything into concrete, very specific things
that lodge in the mind. And that is a demagogic
genius, but let's face it, he has it.
I still think the electorate will turn, but
he is not to be underestimated for that demagogic
ability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, you said a minute ago
that Republicans had -- some Republicans hadn't
been strong enough in their disagreeing or
denouncing what Trump said about Muslims.
But it's been interesting to watch Ted Cruz,
senator from Texas. He's one who seems to
be rising in the public opinion polls. What
is it that he's saying? And his statement
about Trump, if I got it correctly, was, I
don't agree with him, but he has a right to
say that.
And then there was, I guess, the story that
came out today or yesterday where, in private,
he said he thinks Trump is going to collapse,
but then -- Trump later shot back, and Cruz
said, oh, Trump's terrific.
But how do you explain Ted Cruz?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, if you want to know what
a candidate really thinks, you tape him in
an off-the-record fund-raising meeting. And
that's where Ted Cruz did say that, that he
didn't think Donald Trump had the judgment
to survive and to win the presidency.
Ted Cruz has just been right up to Donald
Trump's left shoulder. Donald Trump insinuates,
as David puts it, that Barack Obama may not
be a total American because he won't say radical
Muslim terrorist, or extremist, and he won't
use that term, he won't, in other words, give
it the religious component, and he says, there
is something going on there, he says.
Well, Ted Cruz calls him an apologist for
radical Islam instead. Now, it's one thing,
Judy, if I disagree with you and say you're
mistaken or you're ill-informed. When I start
demonizing your motives -- and he does that.
He does that in speech. He's sort of Donald
Trump with better academic credentials, a
better haircut and probably 60 I.Q. points.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, other than that, what
would you add about Ted Cruz?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, Cruz is interesting because
he's universally unpopular.
MARK SHIELDS: Universally.
DAVID BROOKS: In the law firm, at school,
among the Republicans -- when he was working
with George W. Bush's campaign, he could not
get a serious job after that, because everyone
said, I will not work with that guy.
He comes to the Senate, Republican senators,
if they had a vote between some Democrat to
be majority leader and Ted Cruz, they would
vote for the Democrat. He is just unpopular.
And he's used that unpopularity to his benefit
in this campaign. Look, they all hate me.
And so, if you're running an anti-Washington
campaign, the fact that everyone who works
with you hates you suddenly becomes a plus.
The other interesting is, for a guy who runs
on principle, he's extremely tactical. He's
very deft at moving this way and that. And
so the Republican Party faces this problem,
that they don't want Trump, but the alternative
might be Cruz, and they don't want that either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will leave it on that
note, David Brooks, Mark Shields.
And we have a reminder about some programs
to come from our PBS colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for "Washington Week,"
which airs later this tonight. Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: For better or worse, Donald Trump
has transformed the nature of the 2016 presidential
campaign. Tonight, our roundtable tackles
what that means for politics, for policy,
and for the way Americans see themselves,
tonight on "Washington Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then, on tomorrow's "PBS NewsHour
Weekend": how an investment in wind power
has helped put Denmark on the path to energy
independence.
And that's the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Monday, we examine the results of the Paris
climate talks.
I'm Judy Woodruff. Join us online, and again
right here tomorrow evening.
From all of us at the "PBS NewsHour," have
a great weekend. Thank you, and good night.